---
pageTitle: What is und-css
description: und-css is an SCSS-framework—but not in the Bootstrap or Foundation sense of framework. und-css provides solutions to common layout challenges and gives you a basic generator for utility styles.
---

## Meta-Framework
und-css isn’t a CSS framework in the original definition. That is, it doesn’t
come with any styling. und-css is meant to provide a solid baseline for your
custom CSS styles by being almost fully customizable allowing you to freely
configure design tokens and creating as many (or as little) utility classes as
you like. und-css is here to speed up your process, not to make all your
websites look the same.

## Parts
und-css consists of three parts: Tokens, Objects and Utilities. These serve as
the foundation for further styling that can be built on top of it (by writing
custom components) or with it (by generating a lot of utility classes).

### Tokens
The formalization of visual language (read »design system«) is at the heart of
the und-css approach. At its core und-css is a config file (`_settings.scss`)
containing all neccessary information about the visual language of the site or
app you’re building, including:

* Typography
  * Sizes
  * Font Families
  * Leading
  * Tracking
  * Measures
* Colors
* Layout Values
  * Spacing
  * Widths
  * Dimensions
  * Breakpoints

und-css takes all the information provided in the config and converts them to
CSS custom properties, so other parts of the stylesheet can easily access them.

The tokens generated by und-css are fully customizable in the config file.

### Objects
Objects are meant to be time-savers by providing simple abstractions over common
layout challenges such as grids, boxes or centering things. Objects help you to
quickly create macro layouts. Parameters of objects can be altered using
modifiers, to make adjustments to your micro-layout.

### Utilities
Utility classes, sometimes also called atomic or functional CSS, just do one
thing like setting a color, font-size or spacing (most of the time they will just set a single CSS property). und-css comes with a simple utility class generator that can be fully configured to suit your needs (and file size). By default only commonly used utility classes are provided.

## Motivation
und-css was created as an internal tool to be used in personal and [und Pohlen](https://und-pohlen.de) frontend projects. It is a structured approach to the way I write CSS—that is more from a graphic designer’s perspective and less from a developer’s perspective.

und-css combines my CSS experiences with the good parts of frameworks I’ve
worked with over the years. Honorable mentions include: InuitCSS, TailwindCSS
and Every Layout.

### Why SASS?
The answer is quite pragmatic: Because it’s the Preprocessor I am most familiar
with. SASS isn’t my dream choice for this project, but given my experience with
it, it provided a quick and easy way to get a first version of this framework
done. In the future I plan to move the codebase to a more contemporary tooling like
PostCSS.
